The Big three: 

1. A more systematic literature review is needed to see where this paper stands
in relation to existing work

2. More discussion on why the maps are a good measure of state presence would be
helpful pg. 14

3. Some more discussion of how the results link to the main theoretical
mechanisms. 

Smaller stuff:

CB questions the extent to which PCS did ease inter-ethnic security dilemma.

Why can't non-state ethnic groups credibly commit? These needs a bit more
detail, is it because they can't believe that the "other" ethnic group won't
actually punish violations? Or will do so in a way not agreed upon? Too strongly
worded?

Pg. 5: specify that the state resolves horizontal security dilemmas (while it
might still produce vertical ones, as CB notes) MINE

Examples of states (Oyo and Dahomey) right to adjudicate capital crimes, most
likely to escalate. Good point!

Elevate footnote 7? Stationary bandits.

On pg. 9: What happened to areas with no existing hierarchical structures during
colonization? Light imprint, or direct rule/centralization?

Pg. 11 Rwnada, Buganda/Uganda and Botswana

Settlement patterns on pg. 15: We do not hypothesise either high or low values
of ethnic fractionalization in a given are, but rather fuzzy borders in the case
of former state areas and harder borders and more clearly visible
'cell-structures' in areas with no former states. Which is visible using a
fractionalization index, but hard to test as far as I know. OR: are we
predicting areas of *very low* fractionalization? By now, most places have
'fractionalized', the only places where groups remain homogeneous is in areas
which still have low state presence, and that should correspond to low
PCS-presence. Could still test this at the prio-grid level (to control for
surface water and population density). Would be a bit of a hassle, and I am not
sure we will get 'results', but probably have to do it at some point.

Clarify 'cell' on page 19.

Problem with the Mossi kingdom/Mossi states? add Legend
