West Africa

System

This chapter discusses what we will label the "Sahelian" international system.
We use the term loosely to refer to states connected to the Sahelian climatic
region, rather than as the climatic region itself. Our "Sahelian" international
system encompasses a band of states stretching from the coast of Senegal to
Egypt and Ethiopia in the east. Between the Atlantic ocean and the Red Sea were
several clusters of states, beginning with the Senegalese micro-states of Cayor,
Waalo, Baol, Sine, Saloum and Futa Toro, from which the jihad of Usman di Fodio
spread across West Africa from the beginning of the 19th century. The effects of
this jihad reached as far as the Borno emirate in modern-day Nigeria and Chad.
Moving east, the system includes the Islamic states of Tokolor and Massina along
with the older empires of Segu and Kaarta that were extinguished during the 19th
Century. Further east and south were the complex of states in modern-day Burkina
Faso (Yatenga, Ougadougop and Tengodgu) and the more centralized Asante empire
and Dahomey empire on the coast. Then there were the "Yoruba" polities,
dominated at the beginning of the 19th Century by the Oyo empire, which
disintegrated in many smaller warring and competing states in the 1830s. Moving
north again we come to a band of states that stretch along around Lake Chad
including the Borno empire and Wadai, across to Darfur in modern day Sudan and
Ethiopia. The system also includes the North African states from Morocco in the
east to Egypt in the north. 


Why are these states a coherent system? Many shared an Islamic culture and
religion  -  nearly all the states along and north of the Sahelian belt were
formally Islamic and linked by networks of religious scholars and pilgrimages.
However, we don't limit the system to these Islamic states because they were
closely connected through trade and war  -  especially trade in slaves and gold
-- to the states of the savannah further south and the states of the coast.
Slaves, for example were taken north from the peripheries of the Asante empire
and Oyo empires towards the Sokoto Caliphate and Borno and south to European and
American merchants on the coast. The boundaries of our "Sahelian" system are at
the Mediterranean in the north, Egypt, Ethiopia and the Arabian Peninsula in the
east and the Congolese belt of rainforest in the south. To the north the
Mediterranean marks a transition from the North African states (which we
consider to be a part of the Sahelian system for this chapter) and the European
state system. These north African states constituted the fringes of the Ottoman
empire (and were part of the Ottoman empire for periods of the 19th century) and
mark the boundary region between the African system and the Ottoman-dominated
system. It is important to include the North African states, however, because
they regularly traded across the Sahara with African states further south and
religious connections were much tighter between (for example) the norther
Nigerian states and Libya than they were between Libya and Europe. In addition,
Egypt ruled large parts of modern Sudan and some parts of Ethiopia during the
19th century. Further south the sparse population and dense rainforest of
Central Africa formed a natural barrier that separated the states of North and
West Africa from those that were further south. States such as Darfur and Wadai
raided into these "marches" for slaves and war-booty, but the denser state
presences to the north petered out into areas of decentralized authority and
sparsely populated rainforest.  While we focus on the indigenous states of
Northern Africa in this chapter, other actors were clearly important. Europeans
were a minor presence at the beginning of the 19th century and limited to
coastal trading enclaves. By the end of the 19th century European states ruled
most of the African continent (if only formally for many regions). The Ottoman
Empire was also an important player, especially in the early 19th century as it
tried to maintain control over its vassals in Algiers, Tunis, Tripoli and Egypt.
Interactions in this system were less dense compared to Europe, the Middle East
or South Asia. Most states were concerned with and shaped by events in
neighboring states and had little contact with or knowledge of events that took
place further abroad. Some analysis suggests that parts of Africa, including the
Sahel, had a town distribution and density similar to parts of pre-modern
Europe.  These is little evidence, for example, that the Asante empire had
regular contact with the Sokoto Caliphate, even though both states existed at
the same time and were relatively close to each other.  This was a thin system
due to the high costs and slow pace at which information and goods travelled.
Horses, for example, were common in the North African states and those along the
(climactic) Sahelian belt, but the tsetse fly meant that horses did not survive
further south and most traffic was on foot unless navigable rivers permitted
water-transportation.  Although travel was slow, movement was an important
feature of Sahelian polities. People, capital cities and even states moved.
Populations were more difficult for states to "capture" and flight was often an
option for villages that wished to exit the rule of a state. Shifting capital
cities in response to invasion, changes in leadership or other strategic
concerns was relatively common. Segou is thought to have changed its capital six
times. Whole states could move, as did the state of Katsina when displaced by
the Sokoto caliphate or the core of the Oyo empire which fled south and created
the state of Ibadan.  Some sub-systems had more frequent and dense interactions.
The Yoruba states, for example, shared common origin myths and had been
integrated through a system of city states and trading networks for centuries,
and before the rise of the large Islamic empires of the 19th Century (Futa Toro,
Tokoloar, Masina and Sokoto). The Oba of Dahomey, for example, claimed the
divine ancestry as the Alafin of Oyo and the rulers of the smaller Yoruba
states.  The 19th century was also a period of rapid change in Africa. The
Sahelian system here was by far the most dynamic in terms of state creation and
death, when compared to South Asia and South-East Asia. Rapid economic changes
also characterized the 19th century and disrupted old forms of rule. The slave
trade was formally abolished in 1807 but intensified through illicit networks
throughout the 19th century. The domestic demand for slaves, used in both labor
and state administration, did not abate.  European markets demanded agricultural
products and manufactures that provided new economic opportunities for those
states that could adapt. Guns became widespread throughout the continent and
empowered local rulers that could trade with European merchants in order to
obtain them. The differential growth of the power of coastal states through
slave-trading is one possible reason that the Oyo empire had collapsed by 1830,
for example. The influence of the isolated European trading colonies increased
dramatically as the century progressed until they were the dominant military and
political power on the continent. Historians point out that European domination
was not obvious or even likely at the beginning of the 19th century. The Fulani
jihads, the decline of the Ottoman Empire and the rise of the Asante and Dahomey
empires looked like more consequential events. 


Many new states were born. Important among these were those created by jihadist
movements in the early and mid- 19th Century. The Tokolor, Masina and Sokoto
empires ruled large parts of modern-day Niger, Mali, Nigeria and Cameroon. The
Tokolor empire and Sokoto survived until the end of the 19th century and only
disappeared because Europeans conquered them. In addition to the jihadi states
were several empires led by military leaders. These included the Wassulu empire
in modern day Guinea, led by Samori, the Mahdist state in the Sudan and Rabih's
state in Sudan and Darfur which started as a Egyptian-sanctioned military
expedition and ended with a the warlord Rabah conquering Darfur, Kordofan and
parts of Borno, leaving large parts of the Sudan and Chad under his rule. The
Ethiopian empire, which had disintegrated into feuding and warring warlord
states at the beginning of the 19th century was re-unified under the leadership
of Menelik II. Ethiopia was not colonized and its contemporary borders are
similar to the borders of the empire at the end of the 19th century. Menelik II
was also responsible for shifting the capita city to Addis Abba from the older
seat of the empire in Gondar.  Many states disappeared. Nearly all the
indigenous states south of the Sahara were colonized by European states by the
end of the 19th century (the exceptions were Morocco, Liberia and Ethiopia).
States were extinguished by other, local African states, before the scramble for
Africa spread over the continent, however. The Oyo empire had collapsed by 1830,
leaving behind a collection of small states that fought a series of devastating
wars through the mid-19th century, while other parts were absorbed into the
Sokoto caliphate. Numerous states on the Ethiopian highlands were unified as
Menelik II conquered them from the Shoa kingdom. The once independent Hausa city
states of Kano, Zaria and Zinder were conquered in the Fulani jihad and became a
part of the Sokoto Caliphate.  The Toklor empire conquered the relatively old
Niger river states of Kaarta and Segu along with the Macina caliphate which was
only established in 1818. The Funj sultanate collapsed and was occupied by Egypt
in 1821.  States that existed and survived through the 19th century also
underwent important changes. Dahomey and the Asante empire commenced state
centralization projects that left power increasingly concentrated in absolute
monarchy that encroached more and more on the daily lives of their citizens.
Egypt, Tunisia, Ethiopia and the Macina caliphate all attempted major reforms
aimed at collecting more tax revenue more efficiently, expanding their state
infrastructures in the process. They created large standing armies and
sophisticated bureaucracies that were able to monitor and tax populations to an
extent not seen before on the continent. The laws of the state were administered
more evenly across the territory of the state and influences an increasing
number of life activities. These projects were often left incomplete with the
coming of colonialism, but in some parts of the Sahelian system, zones of state
control were expanding and deepening.  In summary, this chapter examines a
system of loosely connected states stretching from Morocco and Senegal to Egypt
and Ethiopia, north to Mediterranean and south to the Congolese rainforests. The
foundations of this system were trading networks that moved from the interior to
the coast and across the continent. States along the (climatic) Sahelian belt
often looked north across the Sahara to Libya, Tunis, Algiers and Egypt for
their trading connections while the coastal and savannah states increasingly
traded with European merchants based on the coast. Trade also occurred laterally
as states like Darfur, Wadia and Borno traded with merchants from Egypt. The
system was also increasingly underpinned by a shared Islamic belief system and
an expanding network of religious scholars and educational institutions. These
Islamic networks expanded and strengthened with the rise of the Islamic states
that emerged in the wake of the Fulani jihad. The 19th century was also a period
of economic, religious and political turmoil and change. The slave trade
formally ended by intensified through illicit trading, European markets became
increasingly attractive and important, Islam's role as a cultural and political
force expanded rapidly. New empires were formed only to be ended by colonialism
and some old states persisted. Those that survived experienced important changes
and shift towards states that increasingly regulated the lives of citizens in
their core areas, with some, especially Dahomey, Asante, Ethiopia, Egypt,
Tunisia and Macina  -  coming to look much more like "modern" centralized
states, which, as we discuss below, was an important break from the past. 

States Decentralized rule West Africa hosted a variety of state forms from large
empires to city-states, nomadic confederacies, loosely associated systems of
chiefdoms and areas that were largely stateless.  Most states in our Sahelian
system, however, were characterized by a small core that was directly
administered by the sovereign and his (they were nearly all male) agents of the
state. Outside of this core were areas under the suzerainty of the state that
retained various aspects of internal autonomy and paid "tribute" to the center,
often through slaves, gold, kola nuts and cowries. Typically, the farther from
the core one travelled, the more autonomy that sub-units retained. Historical
studies give different labels to these states in the 19th century including
"bullseye states" and "radial states", but these labels signify a similar
structure of a small directly administered core surrounded by areas of
increasing autonomy. These were, in the terms of Nexon (2009), "composite
states" where the center made different bargains with local elites, ruling
through a series of "heterogenous contracts". These contracts typically
regulated how much tax or tribute would be paid, when, and in what form. They
often stipulated who had the power to adjudicate capital crimes, the extent of
military service that could be demanded and who had the authority to approve the
leadership of local political units. The content of these contracts differed
depending on the strength of the local political unit, it's value to the center
and the ability of the center to project power. This structure is perhaps most
visible in the area of taxation. Few states taxed directly outside the capital
city. It was much more common to demand that local elites collect taxes and
deliver them to the sovereign as tribute in the form of transfers, rather than
agents of the state directly observing the tax base of its territories,
calculating the tax load and then directly collecting it from those that produce
economic surpluses. It was also common for rulers to tax trade moving through
their territories, making trade cross-roads and junctions especially lucrative
points for states to control. Local elites therefore retained autonomy in how
taxes were collected, so long as they could deliver the demanded amount to the
sovereign.  Rulers in West Africa also taxed where it was easy and profitable to
do so. Tolls and customs duties were common on valuable trade routes, for
example, and especially on slave caravans that moved through their territories.
Moving west to east, state forms across this system were remarkably similar.
Rulers (the Demel) in Cayor in modern-day Senegal governed through village
chiefs whose primary role was to gather tribute for the king. The Segu kingdom
was a "series of subordinate but relatively independent provinces [that] were
acknowledged in exchange for tribute". McDonald and Camara (2012), write that:
"Geographically, Segou exhibits the "bulls-eye" structure typical of many
historic West African states. There was a consciously defined and well-protected
core (in this case approximately 120 X 60km diameter, referred to as the Toeda)
with rings of diminishing political domination and tribute beyond it, giving way
to peripheral areas exploited by raiding".  In the four Mossi kingdoms
(Ouagadougou, Yatenga, Tenkodogo and Fada N'Gourma) the king was the "hub of the
political system", but "the Mossi state was a decentralized on, and the country
was, for the most part, administered without any direct intervention on his [the
king's] part". Towns outside the capital of the Oyo empire were under the
suzerainty of the Alafin, with variations in local bargains between the center
and the towns reflecting `"what he [the Alafin] could get away with'".  Towns
were generally forbidden from engaging in foreign policy -- they could not make
war or form alliances with other polities. They were obliged to bring payments
to the Alafin that were provided at the annual Bere festival in Oyo Ile, but
retained wide-ranging autonomy over how those resources were extracted. Goody
writes of the state of Gonja, to the north of Asante that "partly because the
boundaries of states were of a fluctuating kind, since, owing to limitations in
communications, the control of the paramount was inversely proportional to the
distance from the capital". The early Asante kingdom placed the king at the peak
of an oligarchy of chiefs that retained independent taxation, mobilization, and
judicial institutions. The king could demand resources for foreign endeavors or
in the "national interest" but was otherwise constrained. The huge Sokoto
Caliphate was "a loose confederation of like-minded ruling groups... there was
no central bureaucracy and no imperial army". Hiribarren  (2019) describes the
structure of the Borno empire: "At the centre of Borno stood `Borno proper'
under the direct control of the Shehu. This is what could be considered as the
core of Borno. On the edge of Borno proper, the vassal states were under the
effective control of their own rulers who were under the Shehu himself or more
often a noble at the Shehu's court. The degree of control over the vassals
greatly varied; for example, the Shehus of Borno had more control over Bagirmi
than Zinder throughout the nineteenth century. Finally, at the edge of the
vassal states stood buffer states such as the Bedde territory mentioned above or
the city-state of Fika." The bargains that connected vassals to Borno proper
varied. Some vassals had to paid tribute because they were defeated in war by
Borno whereas other vassals purchased a degree of autonomy from the center. For
the most part, new rulers in vassal states had to be approved by the Shehu
(ruler) of Borno, but the level of freedom that vassals had depended on their
distance from Kukawa (the capital) and political stability in Kukawa. O'Fahey
argues that the Darfur Sultanate "may be seen structurally as a series of zones
radiating out from the center, in each of which the nature and strength of the
ruler's authority varied". To the far east, Ethiopia was, in the middle of the
19th Century "still more a collection of semi-independent provinces than a
unified kingdom". The decentralized state was a very common state form across
the system.  Tribute-paying polities that were otherwise independent were common
on the periphery (i.e ceded no control over policy-making). For example, the
Macina Caliphate reached as far as Timbuktu during its peak and while it
occupied the ancient city, Macina could not hold it and eventually settled a
treaty where Timbuktu maintained its independence while paying tribute to
Macina. Dahomey paid tribute to the Oyo empire whilst maintaining independence
up to 1830 when the Oyo empire disintegrated. The Shoa kingdom was de-facto
independent from the Ethiopian empire based at Gondar through the 18th century,
but from 1876 had to pay the Emperor in Gondar tribute twice annually. In order
to maintain a precarious independence, Bagirmi paid tribute to both Borno and
Wadai. The eastern part of the Gonja kingdom and Dagomba paid tribute to Asanti,
while freely making war and alliances with other neighboring polities. On the
edges of the Maradi state in modern-day Nigeria, local states paid annual
tribute to the Hausa king, but were free to raid into Fulani territories and
maintained their own autonomous, hereditary kingdoms. As we discuss further
down, these graded forms of sovereignty and tribute blurred the line between the
internal and the external realms of states.  The extent to which states were
organized along territorial lines also varied. Most states had rough territorial
boundaries, but these were often fuzzy and better conceptualized as zones of
control or "borderlands" than hard borders. The nature of borders varied across
the geographical spaces that states occupied. Borno, for example, had relatively
well define borders to the East with Sokoto and parts of the West with Bargirmi
and Wadai. Borders to the south and the east were not defined and diffused off
into stateless zones that were raiding areas for slaves and loot. Within the
state, Borno was administered along both peronsal and territorial lines. Nomadic
groups fell under Borno's authority based on personalistic (i.e lineage) lines
while more sedentary agriculturalists were organized and taxed on a territorial
basis. Darfur's boundaries were defined in a similar way. Where Darfur abutted
Wadai there is evidence of borders demarcated with iron spikes by around 1811.
Some states defined authority in relation to people rather than states. The
"Mossi administrator", for example, "was not concerned with territory but with
groupings of human beings." Rather than territorial demarcation, villages owed
allegiance to canton-heads through kinship ties such that villages in the same
geographical area could owe allegiance to different canton-leaders, sometimes
distant leaders. This created a patchwork where authority overlapped
territorially but was organized hierarchically in relation to lineage groups.
This basic model does not preclude the existence of complicated forms of
hierarchy and even cases of heteronomy. The notion that contracts are
heterogenous implies that these governing systems were often complicated. For
example, Sokoto has two and possible three cores that were only loosely linked
together under the aegis of the Caliphate that was nominally ruled from the
small city of Sokoto, where Usman di Fodio resided, while his brother ruled the
Western part of the Caliphate from Gwnadu. The emir of Adawama also acquired so
much autonomy from Sokoto that in practice it often functioned like a sovereign
state. Each of these "cores" or "peaks" sat at the top of their own network of
heterogenous contracts, through which they ruled their territories. These
hierarchies could move down many levels, with subunits delegating aspects of
sovereignty rule to other sub-units that in turn ruled their territories
indirectly. Thus, the central state was often very distant from people's
everyday lives. 

Centralizing states Other state forms existed, however. Some states made an
important (albeit partial) shift from decentralized rule to more centralized
forms of revenue extraction and law-enforcement. Tunisia, Morocco and Egypt
modernized their states by deepening state control, partly to increase their
military strength vis a vis Istanbul and maintain their independence. Egypt
underwent major reforms in the 1820s and 1830s, stimulated largely by the need
to purchase European weapons and modernize the army. Muhammad Ali increased the
amount of land under irrigation and introduced cash crops while replacing the
old Mamaluk (Ottoman) aristocracy with officials appointed by or family members
of the Viceroy. In the 1860s and 1870s Khedive Ismail further modernized,
investing in "a considerable networks of communications  -  railways,
telegraphs, urban amenities" supported by European loans. Tunisia was one of the
most urbanized and modernized states in Africa at the turn of the 19th century,
with a diverse economy based on manufacturing industries and commercial
agriculture, a large middle-class and constitutional government. From 1819
through to the 1850s the Tunisian state expanded the products that it taxed
(especially agricultural products) and increased the tax rate. These increases
were met with resistance, but the Tunisian state bureaucracy also expanded
during this period.  Other stand-out examples of centralizing states in the 19th
century are Dahomey and Asante. Archeological evidence shows that from the
1700s, Dahomey saw a rapid expansion of palace-building from outside of the
capital (Abomey), first to economically valuable areas and then into the
periphery in an increasingly uniform way across Dahomey's territory. This trend
accelerated in the 19th century. As palace buildings were the physical
manifestation of state presence, they reflected the growing presence of the
state in peripheral areas of the state. In particulat, Dahomey centralized under
the rule of Ghezo (XXX-YYY). Although slave-trading was always central to the
Dahomean economy, state-owned palm-oil production became more important as the
European slave trade declined.  an industry which the state increasingly took
direct control of. The bureaucracy also expanded, and the privileges of the
local elites declined.  Asante too was a "composite" state in the 1700s that
become increasingly centralized. The early Asante state was a confederation of
chiefs around Kumasi that retained their own taxation systems, rights of
military mobilization and legal systems. These amantoo submitted to the
sovereignty of the king  -  especially in matters of war and peace - but
retained these autonomous functions.  Starting in the late 18th century, the
king constructed an increasingly powerful bureaucracy accountable to the state
that took direct control of Kumasi and its surrounds  -  supplanting the amantoo
in this area and thickening the layer of provincial administration in vassal
states and tributaries. Taxes became heavier and more diverse, especially
"metropolitan" Ashanti around Kumasi.  McCaskie (1984:170) notes that ". . . the
principal feature of the history of Asante society was the victory of
centripetal control (central government) over the centrifugal tendencies . . .".
Wilks concludes that - before the British conquest in 1896: "The high degree of
control established over the patterns of social, economic, and ideological
organization produced in Ashanti a combination of institutional features of a
kind unusual in West Africa... The Ashanti state in the nineteenth century was
far removed from the `feudalities', to which many scholars... have inclined to
assimilate it".  These were not fully centralized states, but states where the
core of central rule expanded further from the capital and deeper into everyday
lives than was usual in the system. Even the centralizing states were
heterogenous within their borders, typically with an expanding core area outside
of which relations where typically of a tributary nature. Morocco, for example,
was divided into the friendly country, "which paid taxes into the Sultan's
territory" and the unfriendly country "where the government could exert its
influence only by threats and bribes".  Libya (Tripoli) had only loose and
varied control over the Fezzan region and Egypt only ever indirectly controlled
the Sudan, and then lost large parts to the Mahdist rebellion. For example, in
the early decades of the Dahomean state, the core was defined as those areas
were local elites could not adjudicate capital crimes while the more peripheral
polities paid tribute but retained the right to impose the death penalty.
Ashanti's power was still constrained by the aristocratic chieftaincies that
retained their independent treasuries and armies, which the British were
successfully able to play off against the king.  Other forms: Nomads and
"Stateless" Societies There were also forms of Donelley's nomadic states. Brakna
and Traza in modern-day Mauritania were "mobile polities" that exacted tribute
from subordinates and moved on. There were perhaps 55,000 Traza and 60,000
Brakna between 1800 and 1840. Some regions were "stateless" and ruled by small,
decentralized chiefdoms. The Sanusi brotherhood, which arose in Cyrenaica in
Libya existed at the very margins of statehood. It was a movement of religious
scholars that controlled a "network" of trade routes in the Sahara and rules
through, "small independent principalities based on palm tree plantations" which
were "hegemonic" in Cyrenaica. People settled around the edges of lake Togo were
organized into small-scale villages that had no king but a spiritual leader, the
Be-Togo, whose main role was to be absent from public affairs and
administration. The Kikuya and Masai were largely organized through
"transversal" ties among kinship groups rather than horizontal ties between
leaders and subordinates.The Mende people in Sierra Leone occasionally organized
into larger confederacies, but otherwise operated through an extremely
decentralized forms of organization underpinned by the Poro secret society.
There were also unusual or hybrid forms of states that emerged at the
interstices of larger empires. The most striking of these were the Mahdist state
and Rabih's state. Rabih's state began as an Egyptian raid into the Sudan that
ended up conquering as far west as Darfur and the borders of the Bornu empire in
just a few years. Rabih ended up de-facto ruling a territory the size of France,
while being nominally subordinate to Egypt, was in practice a new independent
state in the Sudan. The British and French dealt directly with Rabih, not with
the Egyptians after the Berlin conference. The Mahadist state started as a tax
rebellion in Kordofan and created an administrative structure that was able to
withstand Egyptian attempts to retake it. The Mahadist state was only defeated
by the British.  Summary In summary, the dominant state form in the middle north
African belt of states was a small directly administered core surrounded by
increasingly autonomous provinces. On the edges of these states there may be
states that pay only tribute to the center and retain all other aspects of
sovereign decision-making. Local elites retained more autonomy the further from
the center they were located, with peripheral areas largely independent. The
form of state administration was common because rules faced common constraints
on state-making imposed by the low population density, the high costs to
transporting people and goods, and the slow pace at which state power could be
projected. In many cases, establishing a "thicker" state presence simply not
worth the costs of building and maintaining it. There were important exceptions,
however. Egypt, Tunisia, Asante and Dahomey were more centralized by the end of
the 19th century, as were Morocco and parts of Algiers. In the next section we
discuss how relations between these states were ordered, and pay close attention
to how states managed relations with those polities on their peripheries. 

Explaining variations in State Forms Why did centralized states form in some
areas but not others.  What determined why these more centralized states arose
in some places nut not others? We argue that rulers had more to gain from direct
rule in these areas. Central was population density and available land. There is
also a theory that the rise of slave-trading on the coast stiumualted the rise
if large hinter-land states that could benefit from this trade. Population
density, Gold? War



What determined how far these core areas extended? Most sources point to the
idea that rulers took as much as they could get away with. With the main
constraint arising from the costs of waging military expeditions to enforce
contracts and the high costs of establishing a thicker state presence relative
to the tax benefits of doing so. These heterogenous contracts reflected a
compromise between rulers that had an interest in extracting resources from and
dominating the decision-making of polities under their suzerainty and local
elites that wanted to maintain as many of these privileges as possible while
avoiding a war with the centre. Because the costs of transport were high,
peripheral polities had substantial bargaining power and were largely autonomous
even while falling under the aegis of larger, imperial states. 

On p. 26 of Oliver and Atmore there is this interesting line where horses and
beasts of burden coundn't cross because of the tstse fly  -  would this have
lowered interaction capacity? These are the "Bantu states" that were nearly
completely cut off from the outside world.  Also I have a note here about Rabihs
state and the Mahdist state and severe principal agent problems. 

International Relations Boundaries and Borders First, to what extent can we even
speak of a differentiation between `internal' and `external' relations if states
were highly decentralized and some, if not many, states based their authority on
personal ties rather than territorially demarcated control? The line between
internal and external relations was certainly broader and more opaque than in
the modern European state system, but the rulers of African states themselves
often differentiated between peoples or territories that fell within their realm
of authority and those that fell outside of that authority, creating a
meaningful distinction between internal and external affairs.  Zones of
weakening state control and ambiguous relations based on tribute and vassalage
makes it difficult to pin down precisely where the authority of one state ended
and another begun, in some cases. The Asante empire exacted tribute from Dagomba
and parts of Gonja to its north, but did that mean that these regions were
"inside" the Asanti state? Bornu exacted tribute from Mandara in the south and
Zinder in the north, but both states operated with relative freedom in relation
to nearby polities. Egypt was on the fringes of the Ottoman empire but was it a
part of the same state ruled from Istanbul? Some boundary areas were more like
buffer areas or contested zones where sovereignty over communities fluctuated
and was unclear. These might contain states that were independent but paid
tribute to another state. There were also borderless regions, often where fading
state authority bled into regions of decentralized control or stateless areas
occupied by ethnic groups, villages or small chiefdoms. These marches were areas
where states typically raiding grounds that the stronger states used to kidnap
slaves and take war-booty.  It is in these interstices of states that we find
most of our examples of heteronomy or overlapping sovereignty. For example,
Bargirmi was a state nestled between the Kanem-Bornu empire and Wadai in modern
day Nigeria and Chad. Coqery-Vidrovitch (2009) writes that "at the time [around
1886], Bargirmi was a sultanate in full decline, sometimes under Wadai control,
sometimes under Bornu control and sometimes even paying tribute [mainly in
slaves] to both". Trading towns in eastern Gonja (Ghana) were subject to both
the Asante empire and the Gonja kingdom. In the 1880s, Egypt was formally
subject to the Ottoman empire and its finances were controlled by a consortium
of European bankers, while the ruler retained sovereignty in most other areas of
policy making. Lagos had three sovereigns when it became a British colony in
1861 and continued to pay tributes to the Benin kingdom and simultaneously
acknowledged the spiritual sovereignty of Ile-Ife. In modern day Sierra Leone,
Little (1967) describes the intermixing of nested sovereignty and heteronomy on
the fringes of the Mande polities: "it was quite possible for a tributary state
situated geographically on the borders of the confederacy to undertake military
conquests of its own. This would give rise to an additional pattern of
overlordship, but without altering the original relationship of the chiefdom
connected to its own high chief. Finally, a tributary member of the second
hegemony might, in its turn, carve out yet a further "empire", while continuing
fealty to its own overlord. It was also possible for a given people to pay
homage to more than one high chief at the same time".  Forms of heteronomy also
arose on the fringes of the Sokoto Emirate. The Hausa Emir of Katsina fled the
city of Katsina and established a new state just to the north called Maradi. In
between the Maradi state and "old" Katsina, which now fell under the aegis of
Sokoto were states that paid tribute to Maradi while "some also paid tribute to
another state to avoid molestation". Heteronomy in these examples arises at the
fringes of highly decentralized states, most likely as a survival strategy that
states used to maintain independence when nested between other states that could
not effectively project power into their peripheries. Heteronomy may even have
been quite common on the edges of these decentralized states.  There were other
examples of cross-cutting authority relations. The Islamic region was clearest
with networks of mosques and schools that linked peoples across the Sahel and
cut across the borders of states. Movements such as the Sanusi brotherhood  -
part state, part trading guild and part religious sect -- crisscrossed the
Sahara from the Fezzan in Libya to Borno in Chad. The "marabouts" in modern-day
Senegal also cut across the borders of the Senegalese states. Kinship and
"ethnic" networks also cut across borders, but most historians are at pains to
note that ethnicity played only a small role in ordering relations between
groups in pre-colonial Africa, rather it was often states and economic changes
that provided the bases for ethnic claims in the post-colonial period.These
cross-cutting networks became the basis for state-building efforts. The
Sokoto-Caliphate drew heavily on networks of religious scholars to hold the
massive, sprawling empire together, to the extent that Howards claims that
Sokoto "created a territory" with commensurate changes in identity, especially
with a deepening of Islamic belief and practice.  Relations of graded
sovereignty, buffer zones and heteronomy made defining where sovereignty began
and ended difficult but contested "zones of interaction" gave way to communities
and territories that were clearly under the authority of one state or another.
Put differently, although boundaries were fuzzy, there were boundaries and
sometimes these boundaries were physical and territorial. For example, Borno and
the Sokoto Caliphate were two large, decentralized polities that existed in the
19th century. The following correspondence from Usman di Fodio (the ruler of
Sokoto) to Muhammad Al-Kanemi (de-facto ruler of Borno) shows that both Islamic
leaders conceptualized their boundaries in territorial terms (as quoted in
Hiribarren 2017: 33): "We profess the same religion, and it is not fitting that
our subjects should make war on each other. Between our kingdoms are the pagan
Bedde tribes, on whom it is permissible to levy contribution: let us respect
this limit: what lies to the east of their country shall be ours: what lies to
the west shall be yours. As for Muniyo, Damagaram and Daura, they will continue
to be vassals of the Sultan of Bornu, who in return will surrender to you all
his claims to Gobir and Katsina." Similar policies governed relations between
Adawama and Borno to the south. Both the Sokoto Caliphate and Borno made
"extensive use" of border-forts to protect their frontiers, reflecting active,
centrally-formed frontier policies and a distinction between realms within the
authority of the state and those under the authority of another state. Bornu,
for example, hosted representatives from Tripoli, Istanbul, Sokoto, Oyo and the
neighboring states.  While there are debates around the extent to which African
states were "networks" rather than polities that conceptualized political power
in territorial terms, Hiribarren (2017) notes that Borno's territorial
boundaries were recognized externally and internally.  "Its boundaries, even if
not always precisely defined, were recognized not only at a local level but also
by the Ottoman Empire, the Sokoto Caliphate and other states of the Chad
basin.... Far from being vague, Borno's boundaries were known to its inhabitants
with all their fluctuations during the nineteenth century. Conceptions of
boundaries existed in Bornoan mentalities as well as in travelers' narratives.
Admittedly, the different travelers had a Eurocentric perception of Borno and
conceived Bornoan boundaries as a mixture between lines and undefined zones;
however, despite the relative lack of direct sources, the Bornoans seem to have
conceived their own territory clearly and had a sense of belonging to a specific
territory demarcated by boundaries. The territorial organization of Borno proper
and its satellite states on the one hand, and the management of the borders
through agents as the galadimas and the kachellas on the other hand, clearly
indicate that nineteenth-century Borno can be defined as a territory."
Non-Islamic states also recognized realms that were inside and outside of their
authority. The Asante and Dahomean empires had relatively well defined
boundaries, and the boundary between the Oyo empire and Dahomey may have been
physically demarcated. The Yoruba states (Oyo, Ijesha, Ijebu, Ketu) had a
"recognized center" and "recognized boundaries... these were apparently
sometimes demarcated by earthworks...the allegiance of every town was known,
though liable to change with the fortunes of the kingdom". Africans had accurate
maps that European explorers and colonial officials relied on to construct their
own maps. Traders in particular had a "detailed cognitive cartography".  Some
African states had (very small) diplomatic staff and many states received
emissaries and diplomats from other states.  There were shared notions of
diplomatic immunity spread widely across the system. A handful of states also
had state officials dedicated to advising on or managing "foreign" affairs.
Dahomey had a minister to manage affairs with the "whites". The Oyo empire had a
dedicated diplomatic corps, the Ilari. States clearly perceived that polities
and communities could be differentiated between those that were under the
authority of the state and those that were outside. It was common for states to
mutually recognize these spheres of authority.  This shows that concepts of
people or territory falling inside and outside of the political authority of
state leaders prevailed in large parts of West Africa. These distinctions were
clearer where states collided with each other and less well defined (at least in
territorial terms) on the edges of highly decentralized states. States organized
relations with those polities "outside" their authority. 

International Order To a large extent and despite the prevalence of highly
decentralized polities, international relations could be described as largely
"anarchic". Smith writes that foreign affairs in West Africa were "above all
questions of peace and war, and then such practical matters as the conclusion of
treaties, the establishment of frontiers, the development and protection of
trade and the payment of tribute". Much about the international relations of
Sahelian states would be familiar to scholars of European and contemporary
international relations. These relations were overwhelmingly bilateral and
focused on neighboring states. Sokoto had little diplomatic contact with Egypt
or Darfur and the Wassulu empire in Guinea had little contact with Asante in
Ghana. There were no international institutions to regular conflict or trade, no
system or sub-system-wide conferences or norms that established regular contact
between the system members where a shared sense of what the "international"
meant might be developed. There were probably thin norms regulating diplomatic
intercourse and the declaration of war, but there were few other system-wide
institutions dedicated to the regulation of international affairs. There is an
important sense in which international relations in West Africa were governed by
"anarchy" and the demands of state survival, albeit in a system where states
were more diffuse and projecting power over territory was expensive and slow.
Tributary relations between otherwise independent states were common, and an
important difference between the European state system and the West African
system. Tributary relations are likely an efficient means of extracting
resources in system where transport and communication are slow and difficult but
also introduce severe monitoring and principal-agent-problems. Egypt, Tripoli,
Tunisia and Algeria were all largely self-governing and independent for parts of
the 19th century but paid tribute to the Ottoman empire. Timbuktu, ruled
independently by a dynasty of Moroccan traders paid tribute to Macina in order
to retain its independence.  

Competing sources of international order existed that occasionally influenced
the behavior of states. These were the Islamic order, the Yoruba order, the
Ottoman order and the European order. Only the Islamic and European order were
universal and powerful enough to potentially integrate and regulate the conduct
of all states in the region. These orders did produce some isolated variations
on the typical system in Africa of decentralized states and largely unregulated
international relations. The Yoruba states technically had to seek approval from
another independent state to legitimize their rule (Ile-Ife) and for a period
the British took over control of the finances of Egypt. Both are examples where
international order may have produced forms of heteronomy. But these examples
were isolated; by and large the international relations of African states were
dominated by rulers that worked to survive and stay in power and in consequences
were dominated by concerns of state survival  -  acquiring and defending
territory, extracting resources, regulating trade and maintain elite cohesion.
Many Islamic states shared a self-conscious identity as members of the broader
Islamic community and especially the jihadi states of Sokoto, Tokolor, Massina
and Futa Toro that emerged from the same religious-military movement. According
to Howard (2005), the spread of Islam opened a "macro-regional realm in which
people exchanged ideas across boundaries". Islam distinguishes between
aterritorial realms of believers and apostates and could have been the basis for
a non-territorial, international order based on religious belief rather than
notions of state authority. This alternative international order could have
shaped the behavior of political elites in a way that superseded or modified
more typical concerns of state and political survival. However, there is little
evidence that relations between the Islamic states were substantially different
to relations between non-Islamic states and relations between Islamic states and
non-Islamic states. Sokoto and Borno negotiated territorial boundaries between
their jurisdictions despite subscribing to the same general religious
principles. Tokolor invaded and absorbed Masina, who forged alliances with
Timbuktu and the remnants of the (non-Islamic) Segu empire in an unsuccessful
attempt to hold back the invasion. Rulers acknowledged the difference between
Islamic and non-Islamic communities and the unity of believers, but Islamic
states still conducted international relations in ways similar to non-Islamic
states; they created territorial borders that divided the community of believers
and that were based not on the extent of Islamic belief but the constraints of
secular political and military power. A primarily political distinction for the
rulers of 19th century African states was not the Islamic and non-Islamic
communities but areas and communities "inside" and "outside" the suzerainty or
sovereignty of a ruler.  Another source of international order, albeit on a
smaller scale can be found in the Yoruba states between Nigeria and Benin. The
"Yoruba" is a modern, colonial construct that originally referred just to
inhabitants of old Oyo, but now referring to a series of states and micro-states
that shared common ancestry myths in southern Nigeria. The Yoruba region was a
(more) dense system of interaction with relatively porous borders across states
and a higher level of cultural exchange that created a "interactive region" and
a "symbolic complex".  Rulers of these states claimed a common ancestry and
divine legitimacy from the spiritual king of Ile-Ife, Oduduwa. As Smith (1988)
states, "each of the Yorouba states was thus a sovereign entity, though related
by tradition and sentiment to Ife and the other states of the Ife family".
Ile-Ife technically had to approve new rulers of Yoruba states, including the
much larger and more powerful Oyo empire, although this is contested. Yoruba
states adopted common state rituals and symbols and drew from similar sources of
divine authority to legitimize their rule. Ile-Ife was a potential source of
international order and even of functional differentiation  -  technically
speaking, while a state like Ijesa might have full sovereignty over its
relations with other independent states, Ile-Ife (another independent kingdom)
controlled the right to appoint kings. Historians question how consequential
this international order was in explaining the behavior of the Yoruba states and
it probably did not constrain rulers in a meaningful way. Ile-Ife likely
ratified the decision of larger and more military powerful states like Oyo and
Ijebu, or simply claimed the approval without seeking it formally. Youruba
states were much more constrained by the various guilds and councils that they
needed to consult before making legislative decisions. This common ancestry also
did not appear to make relations any more peaceful. After the collapse of the
Oyo empire by 1830 the fragmented successor Yoruba states engaged in a
devastating series of wars that depopulated large parts of the Yoruba heartland.
War and conflict was a common feature of Yoruba international relations.
However, the Yoruba order may have shaped unit-types. Smith (1988), for example,
argues that the shared myth of sovereignty deriving from Ile-Ife empowered
smaller kingdoms that could claim ancestry from Ife and raised the costs for
larger and more powerful empires of supplanting the autonomy of subordinate
kingdoms and especially their hereditary rights to appoint leaders. The Yoruba
states, may, therefore have been especially decentralized because of these
shared sourced of sovereignty that no single leader could claim by strengthening
the bargaining hand of local rulers, but it's difficult to separate this impact
from the broader impact of West-Africa's low-density system that produced very
decentralized states in other regions.  There were two additional and often
competing sources of international order  -  the growing European presence and
the declining power of the Ottoman empire. The collision of these sources of
international order also produced isolated and occasional forms of heteronomy.
The first was the Ottoman empire and its relations with the North African
states. For periods of the 19th century, Algiers, Tunis, Tripoli and Egypt were
all formally a part of the Ottoman empire. Egypt was in the unusual position of
being a rival power to the Ottoman empire to which it was formally subordinate.
Egypt acted with relative freedom in its foreign policy  -  it invaded the Sudan
to the south and Syrian and Palestine to the north. In 1839 the Ottomans
attempted to expel the Egyptian army from Syria and Palestine but failed and the
Egyptian army was prevented from marching on Istanbul by the Europeans.
Nonetheless, this war resulted in the Ottoman sultan recognizing Egyptian
governorship over the Sudan and the "viceroyalty" of Egypt being made hereditary
rather than appointed by the Sultan.   These polities retained wide-ranging
authority, even when Ottoman control was stronger. Did it also influence state
forms here? Beys and Meys?  The final source of international order was the
encroaching Europeans, which would eventually integrate Africa into a single
international system. Their goals were primarily to weaken Ottoman rule and shut
each other out of controlling strategically and economically important
territories. To this end Europeans supported the independence of Egypt, and
Tunisia from Ottoman rule (although not of course from European influence). But
they also at times projected an international order based more on commercial
contract-making and a form of international law. This led to the clearest forms
of high-density heteronomy that we see in the period, the assumption of control
over Egypt's finances in 1879 by a British-led European consortium sitting in
the Egyptian leader's cabinet, while the Egyptian rulers maintained control of
other sovereign functions.   In summary, there is much that is familiar about
the international relations of African states. They recognized each other's
territorial jurisdictions and independence, fought wars, concluded treaties,
conducted diplomacy and regulated trade, albeit on a smaller scale and with less
regularity and intensity than in Europe. The struggle to profit and survive in a
rapidly changing international environment is, in our assessment, the best
explanation of the behavior of states in this period. 




 References Bradbury, Robert Elwyn. 2017. The Benin Kingdom and the Edo-Speaking
 Peoples of South-Western Nigeria: Western Africa Part XIII. Routledge.  Brown,
 William A. 1968. "Toward a Chronology for the Caliphate of Hamdullahi
 (Msina)." Cahiers d'tudes Africaines 8, no. 31 EHESS: 428 - 34. JSTOR.
 Butcher, Charles, and Ryan Griffiths. 2018. "War and Variation in the Structure
 of Historical International Systems: A Theoretical Model." De-Centering State
 Making. At
 https://www.elgaronline.com/abstract/edcoll/9781788112987/9781788112987.00015.xml,
 accessed May 13, 2019.  Coquery-Vidrovitch, Catherine, and Mary Baker. 2009.
 Africa and the Africans in the Nineteenth Century: A Turbulent History: A
 Turbulent History. 1st edition New York, N.Y: M.E Sharpe.  Goody, Jack. 1967.
 "The Over-Kingdom of Gonja." In Daryll Forde and P. M. Kaberry, eds. West
 African Kingdoms in the Nineteenth Century London, UK: Oxford University Press.
 Herbst, Jeffrey. 2014. States and Power in Africa: Comparative Lessons in
 Authority and Control. Vol. 149 New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
 Hiribarren, Vincent. 2017. A History of Borno: Trans-Saharan African Empire to
 Failing Nigerian State. Illustrated Edition London, UK: Hurst.  Howard, Allen
 M. 2005. "Nodes, Networks, Landscapes and Regions: Reading the Social History
 of Tropical Africa 1700s-1920." In Allen M. Howard and Richard Matthew Shain,
 eds. The Spatial Factor In African History: The Relationship Of The Social,
 Material, and Perceptual BRILL.  Howard, Allen M., and Richard Matthew Shain.
 2005. "Introduction: African History and Social Space in Africa." In Allen M.
 Howard and Richard Matthew Shain, eds. The Spatial Factor In African History:
 The Relationship Of The Social, Material, and Perceptual BRILL.  Law, Robin.
 1977. The Oyo Empire: The History of a Yoruba State c. 1600-c. 1836. Clarendon
 Press, Oxford.  Little, Kenneth. 1967. "The Mende Cheifdoms of Sierra Leone."
 In Daryll Forde and P. M. Kaberry, eds. West African Kingdoms in the Nineteenth
 Century London, UK: Oxford University Press.  MacDonald, Kevin, and Seydou
 Camara. 2012. "Segou, Slavery, and Sifinso." In J. Cameron Monroe and Akinwumi
 Ogundiran, eds. Power and Landscape in Atlantic West Africa Cambridge, UK:
 Cambridge University Press.  Monroe, J. Cameron. 2012. "Building the State in
 Dahomey: Power and Landscape on the Bight of Benin." In Akinwumi Ogundiran and
 J. Cameron Monroe, eds. Power and Landscape in Atlantic West Africa:
 Archaeological Perspectives Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. At
 https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/power-and-landscape-in-atlantic-west-africa/building-the-state-in-dahomey-power-and-landscape-on-the-bight-of-benin/08E528F538C38DB1E2800AB460E370FF,
 accessed October 2, 2020.  Monteil, Vincent. 1967. "The Wolof Kingdom of
 Kayor." In Daryll Forde and P. M. Kaberry, eds. West African Kingdoms in the
 Nineteenth Century London, UK: Oxford University Press.  O'Fahey, R, S. 2008.
 The Darfur Sultanate: A History. London, UK: Hurst.  Oliver, Roland, and
 Anthony Atmore. 2005. Africa since 1800. 5th edition Cambridge; New York:
 Cambridge University Press.  Osafo-Kwaako, Philip, and James A. Robinson. 2013.
 "Political Centralization in Pre-Colonial Africa." Journal of Comparative
 Economics 41, no. 1 Symposium in Honor of Thrainn Eggertson: 6 - 21.  Smith,
 M.G. 1967. "A Hausa Kingdom: Maradi under Dan Baskore, 1854-1875." In Daryll
 Forde and P. M. Kaberry, eds. West African Kingdoms in the Nineteenth Century
 London, UK: Oxford University Press.  Smith, Robert. 1973. "Peace and Palaver:
 International Relations in Pre-Colonial West Africa." The Journal of African
 History 14, no. 4 Cambridge University Press: 599 - 621. JSTOR.  Smith, Robert
 Sydney. 1988. Kingdoms of the Yoruba. Univ of Wisconsin Press.  Wilks, Ivor.
 1967. "Ashanti Government." In Daryll Forde and P. M. Kaberry, eds. West
 African Kingdoms in the Nineteenth Century London, UK: Oxford University Press.
 --  --  -- . 1989. Asante in the Nineteenth Century: The Structure and
 Evolution of a Political Order. CUP Archive.  Zahan, Dominique. 1967. "The
 Mossi Kingdoms." In Daryll Forde and P. M. Kaberry, eds. West African Kingdoms
 in the Nineteenth Century London, UK: Oxford University Press.

