As an economist, I find this paper baffling. The author has put incredible
effort into documenting historical state presence in Africa. And almost no
effort into anything else.

The Geo-ISD sounds like a massive undertaking. Almost 300 maps have been
digitized and converted into a measure of pre-colonial state presence. Then the
author counts the number of state polygons that intersect a grid cell. This
count is a measure of historical state presence. These data are a welcome
contribution that many economists and political scientists will be eager to get
their hands on.

And then the author shows a couple of figures representing the correlation
between modern conflict and historic state presence, with the sample split by
distance from the capital. In this section of the paper, all tables are
relegated to the appendix, there is no concern for endogeneity or omitted
variables bias, there is no assessment of sensitivity to controls, there are no
fixed effects, there is no attempt to assess whether these relationships held in
the past as well… Basically, the paper devotes a heroic amount of work into
constructing a variable that everyone who works on African states will want to
use, and then uses it for an careless empirical exercise that could not be
published in an economics journal in the top 100. 

My confusion may simply reflect a clash of disciplines. In economics, it is not
enough to introduce a new variable. You have to do something credible with it. I
think this paper would have much more impact if the author were to redo the
second half of the paper from scratch. Take work like Michalopoulos and
Papaioannou (2013) or Moscona et al. (2020) and apply your new measure of states
to an outcome like conflict or development with the same level of rigor and care
as in these published papers. If you simply made a "to do" list from the
sequence of main tables and appendix tables in these papers, you might be able
to get a high impact publication out of this project. Right now, I simply don't
believe your main results because you have no identification strategy and seem
unconcerned with omitted variables. But there's no need for your paper to be
like this.

Figures 3 and 4 lack transparency. These are representations of regression
results. They are not representations of the data itself. Show binscatters or
similar data descriptions.

Indeed: we are simply never shown an equation describing the main regression
specification.

Several standard controls are missing. Alsan's tsetse variable. Nunn and Puga's
ruggedness variable. Sach's malaria index. This is only a partial list.

The only discussion of standard errors is an aside about "queen pattern" (a term
I don't know) autocorrelation. The appendix table itself suggests spatial lags
are used. Spatial lags are about spillovers. I worry instead about p values
being overstated because of spatial correlation in the error term. Show me
Conley standard errors or an alternative. But… in the baseline… are standard
errors even clustered?

I do also worry about the construction of the states variable, even if I am
quite impressed with the undertaking. First, the variable should be normalized
in some way - "number of polygons" is, for example, sensitive to the number of
underlying sources. Second, should recent polygons count more than older
polygons? Long defunct states may no longer matter. Louis Putterman's index has
this feature. Third, should three polygons from three maps in 1850 count the
same as polygons measured in 1100, 1400, and 1600? The former measures the
availability of maps, while the latter measures the presence of states over
several centuries. Fourth, the measure will overstate state presence in
locations that are documented well by European cartographers.

I think the theory on why distance from the capital should matter is
underdeveloped. For example, rural elites distant from the capital may be drawn
from the same ethnic group that dominates the state and may be its allies, not
its rivals. Katsina is far from Abuja, but Buhari is president.

I also have several minor concerns:

It is not clear what "beyond the two dimensional representation" means. The
paper still only reports one value for any x,y grid cell. There are no more
dimensions here than e.g. in Depetris-Chauvin's work.

It doesn't make sense to say that Lagos is in the borders of the Benin Empire,
or of Ibadan, or of Ife. And the Nigerian example on page 4 is very
time-dependent. Would you make the same claim during the time of MEND or Ojukwu?

The sentence spanning p5 and p6 is almost incomprehensible. Belinda Archibong
has relevant work that isn't cited.

I find the title of the paper baffling as well. Is the author a big fan of Floor
Jansen?

P9: "coup"

Why use a cutoff of 10,000 people?

Why not use all 109 states?

The paper meanders at length. 14 pages in, and I have no idea what the data will
end up looking like, what the identification strategy will be, etc…

Alesina is mis-cited: his paper is about borders, not capitals.

It would be nice to see robustness to the use of ACLED or UCDP data.

The claim on page 26 is simply wrong. Right hand side measurement error can bias
coefficient estimates. See for example section 9.4 of the 2012 edition of
Wooldridge's undergraduate textbook.

The discussion on page 27 goes on at length. I often find it hard to separate
out a description of the underlying sources from a description of what the
author has actually done and why.

No-one takes the square root of x in a regression. Even the inverse hyperbolic
sine is preferable.

The whole paper meanders. 

Page 38 throws out some hypotheses only to immediately reject them. The writing
is not structured effectively.
